This is the last video in the sequence on mutual information and how it relates to covariance.
The general goal here in this code challenge will be to calculate mutual information, as you did in
the previous code challenge, and also calculate covariance using the same data pairs and the same conditions
that will allow you to directly compare the features and insights that we can gain from these two measures
of statistical dependencies.
For the data analysis, we're going to separate what are called internal versus terminal punctuation
marks and see how the statistical dependencies differ between internal and terminal punctuations and
how this varies across transformer blocks.
And well, I can already define the distinction between these two punctuation types.
An internal punctuation mark is a punctuation in the middle of a sentence, like a comma and a terminal.
Punctuation is a punctuation mark at the end of a sentence, like a period or an exclamation point.
So here we go with exercise one.
You want to import GPT two medium and push it to the GPU.
In this code challenge, we are only going to use the hidden states, so you do not need to worry about
hooks.
Next, import the text to the book A Heart of Darkness.
It's on Gutenberg.org and we've worked with this book in the past in an earlier code challenge.
Now, the key part of this exercise is to identify internal and terminal punctuation marks and their
indices in the book.
There are actually more punctuation marks than only commas and periods, but in this case, the sample
size is so high from this book that we can really just use these two punctuations and not worry about
any of the other punctuation marks.
Just be mindful that periods are used not only as terminal punctuations, so you'll need to add a filter
or selection, or do something to make sure that you're only getting periods that are used as terminal
punctuation marks.
I found almost 3000 internal punctuation marks, and a little over 2000 terminal punctuation marks in
this book.
If you used a slightly different filter or selection method, you might get slightly different numbers,
but should be somewhere around here.
Then the final part for exercise one is to show a few of the examples.
So here you see some examples.
I just printed out a few examples with nine tokens before and nine tokens after the punctuation mark.
So this is a terminal punctuation.
Actually all these examples are terminal punctuation marks.
By the way.
We're going to use a different context window size for the analysis.
So showing these examples with nine tokens before and nine tokens after.
That's just for visualization.
Just a quick check to make sure that your selection method seems to work okay.
So now you should pause the video and code up this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here are the libraries we will use, including requests to import the text from the web.
Here I'm importing GPT two medium, and I will push it to the GPU and switch it to eval mode.
And now here this is a variable that we're going to end up using fairly often in the next several exercises.
So I just decided to create a little variable instead of having to type out GPT two config embed over
and over again.
So yeah this is just the number of embeddings dimensions okay.
And then here's the tokenizer.
Here is where I import the text.
Again you can either copy this from an earlier code file or you can Google it and then find the URL
here okay.
Then we get the tokens.
And here I'm just printing out the number of total and unique tokens in here.
So 64,000 tokens in total.
Here I am listing the internal and terminal punctuation marks.
As I mentioned in the slides, there are several internal and terminal punctuation marks because the
sample size in this book is so high, we're not even going to use all of them.
Then we don't really need to worry about these other ones.
I'm just listing them here just for your knowledge.
In case you are curious to continue exploring these kinds of analyses with other types of punctuation.
Okay, so here what I do.
I'll get back to this in a moment.
So basically here what I do is I just look through each individual token and I say, is this token one
of the or in the internal punctuation.
Does it match the internal punctuation?
If so, then this element of this vector is punctuation, which is as long as the number of tokens then
it's one.
So it's going to be zero for no punctuation, one for internal punctuation, and two for terminal punctuation.
And now, with the terminal punctuations, I had to write a little bit of additional code just to make
sure that the next element in the string.
Either before or after is not a number.
And that's just to avoid situations like this where you have a period.
But this is actually not used as a terminal punctuation mark.
Okay.
Then the last thing I want to mention is, yeah, the beginning of these books, as you've seen before,
the beginning of the Gutenberg.org books, is a lot of information about the Gutenberg website and the
service that they provide and contributing to it and so on, some other legal information, and I'm
just not interested in that.
I just wanted to get the punctuation marks from the book itself and not from that preamble.
So therefore I just kind of arbitrarily started at 400.
There's nothing special about this number.
I just wanted to exclude the beginning of the text.
Okay.
So now we can run through all of that and we see that there's yeah, 2000 to 3000 punctuation marks
in this book.
So once you get that code settled, then finding the indices is pretty straightforward.
You just want to know where do we have punctuation one.
Actually I can show you this is punctuation.
Actually maybe I will plot this PLT dot plot is punctuation and I'll plot it like this.
Okay, so now you see there's going to be how many tokens were there in the book like 60, 64,000 okay.
So it's going to be a lot of tokens in this plot.
Most of these are zeros.
A very small number of them are ones.
These are the internal punctuation.
So the commas and some of these are periods okay.
So that's for that plot.
And then here I'm just finding the indices where those occur.
And I'm printing out a small handful of the terminal punctuations.
Just the first five.
You can also check this for the internal punctuations also.
Fine.
Now for exercise two.
The main goal here is to get the hidden state activations.
To begin, create two batches of token sequences, one for the internal punctuation marks and one for
the terminal punctuation marks.
Each of the two sequences should have 31 tokens in total, where the token index at position 20 is the
punctuation mark, so that's the target.
You can then run two forward passes, one for the internal and one for the terminal.
And then you can confirm that the sizes of the activations and the number of hidden states that you
get are consistent with these numbers here.
So 250 sequences, 31 tokens per sequence and 1024 is the number of embeddings dimensions in GPT two
medium.
And yeah, by the way, the only reason to use 250 sequences here is just to keep the sample size a
bit small.
So the analyses are a little easier to work with, a bit faster for the code to run.
Of course, if you're doing this in a real analysis for real research, then you could follow exactly
the same analysis approach that we're doing in this code challenge.
But you would want this number to be much, much bigger from, you know, this entire book.
You can sample from lots of other books, from Wikipedia, from Twitter, and so on.
Now, because the model is on the GPU, you will need to copy the batches over to the GPU, but for
the rest of the exercises, it will be convenient to have the hidden states activations on the CPU and
also in numpy format instead of in PyTorch format.
So therefore, the final part of this exercise is to bring the hidden states from the GPU back to the
CPU, convert them into numpy, and then you can make some visualizations.
So here on the left you see the activations averaged over all the punctuation marks.
So averaging over all 250 sequences from index 20 from one hidden layer.
And that's what you see here.
It's interesting to see that there are clearly some extreme activation values here, which means that
there are a small number of dimensions that really care a lot about these punctuation marks.
Now here the x axis is the embedding dimension.
And the scatter plot here shows the internal and the terminal activations.
And then what you see over here is a scatter plot of the activations.
Here are the internal and here are the terminal activations.
Again, each of these dots is the average over all of the sequences across the batch.
And basically what this shows is that the model is responding overall fairly similarly to internal versus
terminal punctuation marks.
So each dot in this plot is a dimension of the from the embeddings.
Okay.
So yeah, it's going to be interesting to see how these averages here compare to the mutual information
and covariance values that we will calculate later.
But this is good enough for exercise two.
So now you can pause the video and get these activations and generate that plot.
And when you're ready or if you get stuck come back to the video and I will walk you through my solution.
So batch size of 20.
There's, uh, 250.
Sorry.
There's going to be, uh, 20 tokens before each punctuation and ten tokens after each punctuation mark,
each of the 250.
So that's going to give us 31 tokens per sequence.
Here I am initializing these matrices for the batches.
So I have uh yeah PyTorch format batch size by context pre plus context post plus one.
And the plus one is for the terminal or the punctuation mark.
And we want these to be integers of course.
Okay so here is pretty straightforward.
I'm just looping over 250.
And then I'm grabbing one of the punctuation location indices and creating a little batch of text around
that or token sequence around that token location.
So minus context pre and then plus context post.
So then do that for internal and terminal punctuations.
Pretty straightforward.
Here I'm running the forward pass.
So I have to do this twice.
And I'm naming the variables differently.
So I get output internal and output terminal.
So I don't overwrite the two sets of activations.
This is the confirmation that we get sizes that we expect.
So there are 24 uh transformer blocks in GPT two medium.
And of course the first one of these is the embeddings the initial token plus position embeddings.
Okay.
So now this stuff lives on the GPU.
We want it on the CPU.
We want it in numpy format.
And also just for convenience I'm creating shorter variable names.
So that's what I do here I define these two variables Hidden states, House intern and turbine.
And then I'm just appending these with each hidden state from each layer, and then detach to remove
it from all the gradient and overhead information, bring it to the CPU and into numpy format.
So there you go.
And now here.
Yeah.
Just to confirm, by the way, there's no specific reason why this needs to be a list.
You could also set this up to be one big matrix a one big tensor.
But I chose to leave it as a list just so it's consistent with how hugging face organizes the hidden
states variables here.
Okay, so yeah, this is just confirmation 250 sequences, 31 tokens and a dimensionality of embeddings.
Dimensionality of 1024.
And then finally to visualize.
So this is just yeah a little bit of data to give us some context about what the data look like.
Here I am getting the average of the internal and and terminal punctuations from this one particular
layer randomly chosen.
Uh, and uh, yeah.
Then this is the exact token index of the punctuation mark.
And now I'm averaging over the first axis, which means that I am averaging over all of the, uh, sequences
in the batch.
So 250 sequences averaging over all of them.
And that's what I show in these plots here.
Now for exercise three, first write a Python function that calculates trimmed mutual information and
covariance for an input pair of variables, the mutual information function you already have from several
previous videos.
So you really just need to copy one of those functions from an earlier notebook and then add covariance
to the calculation once you have that function, you can calculate the mutual information and covariance
for all the pairs of punctuation marks separately for internal versus terminal punctuations, and that
will allow you to visualize the data like this for example.
So this is just mutual information and only in layer one.
Now to clarify this is a layer index one which means it's the first transformer block.
Remember that in these hidden states the first hidden state layer is actually the output of the embeddings.
So this is the first layer where the embeddings are really processed and transformed by the attention
and MLP mechanisms.
Anyway, these matrices show pairwise mutual information values for each pair of punctuation marks.
This one is just for internal.
This is just for terminal.
And the lines over here show the histograms.
So the distributions of all of the unique non-zero elements in this matrix.
So just the lower triangle here.
So this figure shows the mutual information.
And then you can make the same plot again but for covariance instead of mutual information.
And well this is a really striking difference in this case the mutual information and the covariance
look really qualitatively very different from each other.
And you also see this really striking pattern of clustering here.
So there are three groups of covariance values in the data for the internal punctuations.
Now looking at these two figures separately is interesting.
But maybe we can gain some better insights into the relationship or lack of relationship between mutual
information and covariance by plotting them directly against each other.
And that's the goal of this third plot here.
So here you take all of the unique covariance and mutual information elements.
Of course, they have to be matched by the sequence pairs.
And then you plot them as a function of each other.
So in this plot, the x axis shows covariance.
The y axis shows mutual information.
And I've also calculated the correlation coefficient between them.
You can do this with the Pearson correlation.
And that appears in the title of each of these graphs.
So this is for the internal punctuation.
This should say internal not intermediate.
This is for the terminal punctuations.
And here on the right this plot is literally just the superposition of the intermediate and internal
scatter plots.
So this plot plus this plot overlaid, and that gives us this plot over here.
Now the information in this plot is redundant.
It's exactly the same as what I'm showing in these two plots.
But the reason for the redundancy is that when we put all of the information into one subplot, one
panel, then that will allow us to visualize this relationship between mutual information and covariance
across all of the layers.
Now, that's not what we're doing in this exercise.
It's what we will do in the next exercise.
So here in exercise three you can focus on making these three figures, these three plots for layer
one and then repeat for layer 20.
So to do this you don't need to copy and paste into a new code cell.
All you do is change the variable name so that instead of these data being drawn from layer one, they're
drawn from layer 20.
Again, don't worry about any of the other layers in the model.
We'll get to that in the next exercise.
So now you can pause the video and work your way through this.
And now I will switch to code and discuss these findings.
Here is the function to calculate mutual information I change the function name very slightly from the
previous code challenge.
And yeah.
So let's see.
All of this code is identical to the previous, uh, the functions that we had in previous videos.
And now I've added one line here.
So the covariance is the element wise multiplication of the two variables.
They have to be mean centered.
So that's why I subtract the mean.
And then we sum.
And then we divide by n minus one.
So that is the covariance between this pair.
And now this is a pretty interesting set of pair of analyses because we have identical data but just
slightly different measures of statistical dependencies.
And now I'm outputting a tuple of the mutual information value and the covariance value.
Okay.
So then this is just a little sanity check about the indexing.
So I'm just getting one batch one sequence.
And this particular index context pre.
And just to confirm that it actually is a period in this case it's just a punctuation mark.
For example you know if you were indexing like this then that would be wrong.
And all of these subsequent analyses would be not based on punctuations.
Okay.
Very nice.
So now I'm going to run this cell of code here.
Here I am looping over all of these sequences in the batch.
So b I is looping from zero to batch size, and then j goes from b I plus one.
You've seen this now many times.
Here I am extracting the data.
So uh, this particular token, uh, this particular pair of sequences and all of the embeddings dimensions,
and that's what I calculate mutual information and covariance over.
Now, I do not explicitly say what threshold to use.
Uh, I'm here using a threshold of Z greater than five.
You can try exploring different values if you like.
Okay.
And then the outputs of this are a tuple.
So I have mutual information uh internal and covariance internal.
And now I repeat for terminal.
This code is the same as this.
But the variable names are different.
So yeah this code cell takes approximately 40s 35 to 40s to run.
And now here I'm going to do some of the visualizations.
Now we already know that we just need to export or extract the non-zero values from this matrix.
And we want to vectorize them which facilitates calculating histograms and also making scatter plots.
Now in the previous code challenge what I did was use this function.
So triangle upper indices and the one means to ignore the diagonal itself.
So we just get the elements above the diagonal.
So previously I was using this entire function as an input into the matrices.
In this code challenge.
When I was programming this, I thought it would be nice to have a separate variable.
So here you see that variable.
It's a tuple.
It is the the row and column indices for Extracting these elements that we want.
Okay.
And then we do the visualization.
So this part I'm not going to go into a huge amount of detail about.
So creating the images.
And yeah like this is the real core of the code here.
Everything else is just making the plot look a little bit nicer.
So setting the color limits and et cetera.
ET cetera.
All this stuff here I'm calculating the histograms and yeah, also plotting code is important but not
really that interesting okay.
So here is for mutual information.
And here is for the covariance.
All of this code, everything in this cell is literally just copied from this cell.
From this cell.
And all I did was change the variable names.
Uh, where am I?
Change the variable names here.
And also, you know, some other little things like the color limits and so on.
Okay.
Super duper striking, right?
We see these big clusters here really strong clustering.
And here we can also see that in the plot.
So here we see the covariance really shows up as three different clusters but not so much in the mutual
information.
So in fact when we look at the data for mutual information for the internal punctuations, you do see
kind of a double peak here, but it's not really as clear in the mutual information as it is in the
covariance.
So it looks like there might be some additional clustering here, although that is pretty small relative
to this big blob over here.
Okay.
And then this is the plot with both of these superimposed on top of each other.
Again, this panel here has no new information.
But in the next exercise we're going to generate this plot for all 25 layers, and so therefore, having
one plot is a little bit easier than having two plots for 25 layers.
Okay, so, uh, yeah, when you first look at this, you might think that there are different kinds
of commas, you know, three different categories of commas.
Maybe we need to go back to the text and see if, you know, these really correspond to three different
things.
And we're inappropriately mixing them together.
Uh, so therefore we can, uh, have a look at layer 20.
Where do I have this?
Uh, that's all the way back up here.
Yeah.
Okay.
So change this to layer 20, and, uh, don't need to rerun that code.
I do need to rerun the visualization, which I'll do in a moment.
So here's the thing.
If these data really were three distinct categories in the text, then it would be reasonable to expect
that these this strong clustering would be preserved throughout the entire model.
If these are really distinct from each other, and what you will see in a moment is what you've probably
already seen in your own code, is that these are really not at all distinct.
So this they're distinct early in the model.
They are not distinct later in the model.
And in the next exercise you're actually going to see these three clusters merge as we move through
the different layers okay.
So I'm going to go back and replot that in a moment.
But I would just like to make one comment about this very strong negative correlation.
Now what's happening in here is that we have these three distinct groups and that pulls the correlation
down.
Although when you look within any one group, there isn't really a clear correlation between covariance
and mutual information.
Maybe here, but here.
If anything it's positive.
Whereas this overall correlation is negative.
There's actually a name in statistics for this phenomenon.
It's called Simpson's paradox.
Simpson like the cartoon The Simpson's, but it's named after the statistician Simpson.
So Simpson's paradox is also called the subgroups paradox.
And basically it's when you get an artificially inflated correlation that is actually a confound.
It's a specious correlation, because what's really happening is that you have separate groups in here.
Okay, that's just a little discussion point about statistics.
Now let me go back and run this code.
And so here looks quite different.
And here run the covariance code.
And now this also looks really different.
These color values are no longer appropriate.
You can see that here on the x axis.
So I'm not going to go back and change the color values.
But you can mess around with this if you like.
It's the Vmin and Vmax parameters.
But you do see the full numerical range of the distribution here.
That is also interesting because it means that the mutual information numerical values are roughly in
the same range for layer one and layer 20.
But the covariance values are way, way, way larger.
They're like an order of magnitude larger in layer 20 compared to layer one.
I will let you ponder that why that might be the case, what it might mean if it's problematic.
I'll let you ponder that.
I'm going to talk about that more in the next exercise.
But anyway, now we can generate this plot again.
And several things are striking.
First of all, we do not see any clusters here.
Uh, And we also see that covariance and mutual information are now much more similar to each other
qualitatively.
And in fact, if you would square the covariance, you would see that it looks even more like a linear
relationship.
You remember from several videos ago when I talked about mutual information and covariance in the same
lecture.
When I introduced that, I said that mutual information tends to look like squared covariance.
Now, that's not a mathematically trivial relationship.
They're very different analyses.
But yeah, you can see this here as well.
Congrats on making it this far in the code challenge.
We're not yet finished, but I'm going to cut the video here because I want to encourage you to take
a short break and do all the things I always suggest you do on these short breaks.
When you're ready, come back to the next video and we will finish off this code challenge.